Normalization
----------------

Normalization is the process of organizing data in database tables to reduce unnecessary data duplication and avoid data-related problems.

The two things you should remember are:

Normalization -> reduce redundancy (duplicate data)

and

Normalization -> improve data consistency

That's the basic idea.

Why do we need Normalization?
--------------------------------

There are three famous problems normalization helps avoid.

1. Update anomaly

Suppose John changes his phone:

9999 -> 7777

If his information is stored in 10 employee rows, we have to update all 10.

If we update only 9 and forget 1:

John -> 7777
John -> 9999 wrong

Now our database contains inconsistent information.

2. 2. Insert anomaly

Suppose we want to add a new department:

Finance

But there are currently no employees in Finance.

If our table requires an employee row to store department information, we can't easily store the department independently.

That's an insert anomaly.

3. Delete anomaly

Suppose Amit is the only employee in Finance.

If we delete Amit:

DELETE FROM employees
WHERE employee_id = 103;

we might accidentally lose the only information we had about the Finance department.

That's a delete anomaly.


So what does normalization do?
------------------------------

It says:

"Instead of putting everything into one giant table, let's organize related information into appropriate tables."

1NF = First Normal Form
--------------------------

Let's start with a bad table.

employee_id	name	skills
101		Rahul	Java, SQL, Spring
102		Priya	Java, Python

The skills column contains multiple values.

That's a problem.

Instead:

employee_id	name	skill
101		Rahul	Java
101		Rahul	SQL
101		Rahul	Spring
102		Priya	Java
102		Priya	Python

Now each cell contains one value.

That's the basic idea of 1NF.

1NF means each column should contain atomic/single values, not multiple values in one cell.

Polished answer:

1NF requires each column to contain atomic values, meaning each cell should contain a single value rather than multiple or repeating values.

2NF = Second Normal From
-------------------------

2NF = 1NF + No pratial dependency

2NF mainly matters when you have a composite key.

What is Partial Dependency?

Very simply:

A non-key column depends on only part of a composite key, instead of the whole composite key.

In our example:

Primary Key = employee_id + project_id

But:

employee_name -> depends only on employee_id

and:

project_name -> depends only on project_id

That's partial dependency.

How do we fix it?

Separate the tables.

Note: 

If a table has a single-column primary key, partial dependency cannot happen.

Why?

Because there is nothing to have a "partial" dependency on.

For example:

employee_id

is the only primary-key column.

So 2NF is mainly relevant when the table has a composite key.

3NF - Third Normal Form
--------------------------

3NF = 2NF + no transitive dependency

What is Transitive Dependency?

Very simply:

A non-key column depends on another non-key column instead of directly depending on the primary key.

Here:

employee_id -> department_id -> department_name

That's transitive dependency.

Fix : Split tables

Important Questions
--------------------

1. What is normalization?

	Normalization is the process of organizing data into tables to reduce redundancy and avoid data anomalies.

2. Why do we use normalization?

	To reduce data redundancy, improve data consistency, and avoid insert, update, and delete anomalies.

3. What is 1NF?

	1NF requires each column to contain atomic values, meaning each cell should contain a single value.

4. What is 2NF?

	A table is in 2NF when it is in 1NF and has no partial dependency on a composite key.

5. What is 3NF?

	A table is in 3NF when it is in 2NF and has no transitive dependency.

6. What is partial dependency?

	Partial dependency occurs when a non-key attribute depends on only part of a composite primary key.

7. What is transitive dependency?

	Transitive dependency occurs when a non-key attribute depends on another non-key attribute instead of directly depending on the primary key.

8. Can a table with a single-column primary key have partial dependency?

	No. Partial dependency requires a composite key, because the dependency must be on only part of the key.

9. What is the difference between 2NF and 3NF?

	2NF removes partial dependency, while 3NF removes transitive dependency.

10. What are insertion, update, and deletion anomalies?

	Insertion anomaly -> difficulty inserting data because unrelated data is required.
	Update anomaly -> same information exists in multiple places and must be updated everywhere.
	Deletion anomaly -> deleting one piece of information accidentally removes another useful piece of information.

Index in SQL
---------------

Suppose we run:

SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE employee_id = 98765;

The database needs to find employee 98765.

Without an index

Imagine there are 1 million employees.

The database may have to look through:every emp id - from 101 to 98765

That's potentially a lot of searching.

This is similar to opening a 1000-page book and looking for the word "Index".

We wouldn't read every page from beginning to end.

We would use the book's index.

That's essentially the idea behind a database index.

------------

So,

An index is a data structure created on one or more columns of a table to make data retrieval faster.

For example:

CREATE INDEX idx_employee_id
ON employees(employee_id);

Now we've created an index on:

employee_id

So when we run:

SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE employee_id = 98765;

the database can use the index to locate the required row much more efficiently.

Simple definition:

An index is a database object/data structure that helps the database find rows faster without scanning the entire table.

-------------------

Indexes were introduced mainly to solve the problem of:

Slow data retrieval when tables contain a large amount of data.

As the table becomes larger, searching through the entire table can become expensive.

Indexes allow the database to locate matching rows more efficiently.

So:

WITHOUT INDEX
Table -> search many/all rows -> find required row

WITH INDEX
Index -> locate required row -> access table row

-------------

Imp Note: 

We might now think:

"Then why don't we create indexes on every column?"

Very good question.

Because indexes also have a cost.

An index needs:

> additional storage
> maintenance
> updates when table data changes

Suppose we have:
INSERT INTO employees ...

The database doesn't just insert the row into the table.

If employee_id has an index, the database may also need to update that index.

Similarly:

UPDATE employees
SET employee_id = 200
WHERE employee_id = 100;

The index may need to be updated.

So indexes give us:

Benefit : Faster reads/searches

Cost : Additional storage + maintenance overhead for INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE

Clustered vs Non-Clustered index
--------------------------------

Clustered Index = The index determines the physical or logical ordering of the actual table data.

Non-Clustered Index = The index is a separate structure that contains indexed values and references/pointers to the actual table rows.

Clustered Index
------------------

Suppose we create a clustered index on employee_id.

The database organizes the actual table data according to the indexed key.

They are called clustered because the actual data rows are organized/clustered around the index key.

Think of student records arranged by:

Roll Number

instead of randomly:

35
2
19
7
44
1

They could be organized:

1
2
7
19
35
44

So finding a particular roll number becomes more efficient.

Note: A table can have only one clustered index. But, a table can have multiple non-clustered indexes.

Non-Clustered Index
----------------------

The database maintains a separate structure for index with indexed values and references or pointers to the actula table rows.

Here the index is separate from the actual table data.

So,

Clustered

INDEX
  |
DATA IS ORGANIZED AROUND INDEX KEY

Non-Clustered

INDEX
  |
REFERENCE/POINTER
  |
ACTUAL DATA

The index provides an efficient path to find the required rows instead of blindly scanning the entire table.

Example:
---------

Suppose we frequently run:

SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE employee_id = 105;

We could create an index:

CREATE INDEX idx_employee_id
ON employees(employee_id);

Now the database has an index that helps locate employee 105.

The exact implementation depends on the database system, and in many systems indexes use tree-based structures such as B-trees/B+ trees.

Why would we create a Non-Clustered Index?
--------------------------------------------

Suppose our application frequently searches:

SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE department_id = 10;

and:

SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE name = 'Rahul';

We could potentially have indexes on:

department_id
name

These can be separate non-clustered indexes.

Conceptually:

Table
 ↓
employees

Non-clustered index 1
department_id
       ↓
     rows

Non-clustered index 2
name
       ↓
     rows

This is why a table can have multiple non-clustered indexes.

But should we index everything?
---------------------------------

No.

Suppose we have:

employee_id
name
department_id
salary
city
gender
joining_year

We don't automatically create seven indexes.

We usually consider columns that are frequently used for things such as:

WHERE
JOIN
ORDER BY

and sometimes other query patterns.

But the decision depends on the workload and database optimizer.

Note: Indexes can improve query performance by reducing the amount of data the database needs to scan, but the optimizer decides whether an index should be used.

Important questions
-----------------------

1. "Your production application has a table with 20 million records. A query searching by customer_id is taking several seconds. What would you investigate?"

	Wecould say: "First I would analyze the query and execution plan to understand whether a full table scan is occurring. 
	If customer_id is frequently used for searching and doesn't already have an appropriate index, we could consider creating an index on that column. 
	I would also consider the read/write workload and index maintenance cost before adding it."

2. What is an Index?

	An index is a database data structure that helps retrieve rows more efficiently, reducing the need to scan the 
	entire table.

3. Why do we use indexes?

	We use indexes to improve query performance, especially when searching or filtering large tables.

4. What is a Clustered Index?

	A clustered index organizes the table's rows according to the index key. Since the table data can have 
	only one such organization, a table generally has only one clustered index.

5. What is a Non-Clustered Index?

	A non-clustered index is a separate index structure that stores indexed values along with references to the 
	corresponding table rows. A table can have multiple non-clustered indexes.

6. Main difference?

	A clustered index determines the organization of the table data itself, whereas a non-clustered index is a separate 
	structure that points to the actual data.